IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025 10143
Toward Building Human-Like Sequential Memory
Using Brain-Inspired Spiking Neural Models
Malu Zhang
 , Member, IEEE, Xiaoling Luo
 , Jibin Wu
 , Member, IEEE, Ammar Belatreche
 , Member, IEEE,
Siqi Cai
 , Senior Member, IEEE, Yang Yang
 , Senior Member, IEEE, and Haizhou Li
 , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— The brain is able to acquire and store memories of
everyday experiences in real-time. It can also selectively forget
information to facilitate memory updating. However, our under-
standing of the underlying mechanisms and coordination of these
processes within the brain remains limited. However, no exist-
ing artificial intelligence models have yet matched human-level
capabilities in terms of memory storage and retrieval. This
study introduces a brain-inspired spiking neural model that
integrates the learning and forgetting processes of sequential
memory. The proposed model closely mimics the distributed and
sparse temporal coding observed in the biological neural system.
It employs one-shot online learning for memory formation
and uses biologically plausible mechanisms of neural oscillation
and phase precession to retrieve memorized sequences reliably.
In addition, an active forgetting mechanism is integrated into
the spiking neural model, enabling memory removal, flexibility,
and updating. The proposed memory model not only enhances
our understanding of human memory processes but also pro-
vides a robust framework for addressing temporal modeling
tasks.
Index Terms— Dendritic spiking neuron, neural mini-column,
sequential memory, spiking neural networks.
Received 8 June 2024; revised 10 December 2024; accepted 15 February
2025. Date of publication 14 March 2025; date of current version 4 June
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant U20B2063, Grant 62220106008, and Grant
62106038; in part by Sichuan Science and Technology Program under Grant
2024NSFTD0034 and Grant 2023YFG0259; in part by Shenzhen Science
and Technology Program under Grant ZDSYS20230626091302006; in part
by Shenzhen Science and Technology Research Fund (Fundamental Research
Key Project) under Grant JCYJ20220818103001002; in part by the Research
Grants Council of Hong Kong, SAR, under Grant PolyU25216423 and Grant
PolyU15217424; and in part by the Open Research Fund of the State Key
Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, under Grant
BMI2400020. (Corresponding authors: Jibin Wu; Siqi Cai.)
Malu Zhang and Yang Yang are with the School of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu 610054, China.
Xiaoling Luo is with the Key Laboratory of Higher Education of Sichuan
Province for Enterprise Informationalization and Internet of Things, Sichuan
University of Science and Engineering, Yibin 644000, China.
Jibin Wu is with the Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
and the Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Hong Kong (e-mail: jibin.wu@polyu.edu.hk).
Ammar Belatreche is with the Department of Computer and Information
Sciences, Faculty of Engineering and Environment, Northumbria University,
NE1 8ST Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.
Siqi Cai is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119077 (e-mail:
elesiqi@nus.edu.sg).
Haizhou Li is with Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, School of Data
Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK), Shenzhen 518172,
China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3543673
I. I NTRODUCTION
M
EMOR
Y is the ability to retain information about past
experiences and events and to use this information
to guide future behavior [1], [2]. It is an essential part of
human cognition and intelligence, and it plays a critical role
in our ability to learn, remember, and make decisions [3], [4].
The human brain consistently translates lived experiences into
durable memory traces in real-time even following a single
presentation of sensory input. In addition, the brain can store
vast amounts of information and can access this information
rapidly and efficiently while preserving previously stored
memories as long and as faithfully as possible [5]. Moreover,
the brain also can forget information, which is essential for
preventing our memories from becoming overloaded [6], [7].
The concurrent necessity to rapidly encode and store new
information, while also maintaining a large memory capacity,
requires judicious management of the learning and forgetting
processes [7]. However, the precise mechanisms by which
these processes are implemented and coordinated in the brain
remain an open area of research [5], [8].
In recent decades, researchers have dedicated their efforts
to the exploration of the intricate mechanisms that under-
pin human memory. These findings from neuroscience have
inspired the development of various computational models of
memory [4], [9], [10], [11], [12]. However, none of these
models have yet achieved human-level performance in terms
of memory storage and retrieval. The reason for this dis-
crepancy could be attributed to either a specific characteristic
or a confluence of multiple features inherent to biological
networks that were not taken into consideration within these
models [13]. First, most existing memory models utilize sig-
nificantly simplified dendriteless “point neurons” that do not
accurately reflect real neurons’ complex structure and function.
The biological memory system encompasses diverse neurons
exhibiting distinct functional specialization and cooperative
interactions [14], [15]. Second, the neural plasticity is the
ability of neurons to change their structure and function in
response to experience and memory formation involves various
forms of neural plasticity, including but not limited to synaptic
strength plasticity [16], [17], [18], [19], synaptic delay plas-
ticity [20], [21], and structural plasticity [22]. However, many
existing memory models do not consider the combination of
different forms of neural plasticity. Third, the memory learning
and retrieval involve a number of neural mechanisms, such
2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

10144 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed SNN-based sequential memory model. This model can effectively memorize new patterns in a continuous, one-shot, and
online-learning manner while incorporating a forgetting mechanism that helps increase online memory capacity. (a) Schematic illustrating the functionality of the
proposed memory model and its hierarchical structure. (b) DS-neuron model accounts for both the dendritic tree structure and the spike-based communication
mechanism observed in biological neurons. (c) Running process of the proposed memory model. The stages of encoding, learning, forgetting, prediction, and
retrieval correspond to periodic neural oscillations.
as neural oscillations [23], [24], [25], phase precession [26],
[27], and synchronized neural activity [28], [29]. However,
many existing memory models do not adequately account
for these mechanisms, which contribute to a more intricate
comprehension of this cognitive process. Finally, in contrast to
the extensive examination of memory formation and retrieval,
a limited number of models have incorporated the forgetting
process within the memory system, which is noteworthy given
the pivotal role of forgetting in facilitating memory removal,
flexibility, and updating [30], [31], [32].
This article introduces a novel memory model inspired by
neural structures and mechanisms discovered in neuroscience
research. The key features of the model include the following.
1) The model employs a dendritic spiking neuron that
considers both the neuronal dendritic tree structure and
the spike-based communication mechanism. The model
takes full advantage of the spatiotemporal coding of
spiking neurons through the introduction of a spike
timing-based encoding method. This approach allows
the proposed memory model to perform distributed
event-driven computation and facilitates the model’s
implementation on ultralow-power neuromorphic hard-
ware. It also significantly increases the capacity of the
memory model.
2) Inspired by the principles of neural plasticity, the model
orchestrates various forms of plasticity, including adjust-
ments of synaptic strength, synaptic delay, and structural
plasticity. This allows the model to perform one-shot
learning and innately support online learning. That is,
additional training involving new stimuli does not dis-
rupt previous learning.
3) The proposed model investigates the functional roles
of various neural mechanisms pivotal to memory stor-
age and retrieval. These mechanisms include neural
oscillation and phase precession. By carefully orchestrat-
ing these mechanisms, the model can effectively store
streaming information and reliably retrieve memorized
sequences. Therefore, the proposed biological memory
model contributes to a better understanding of various
neuroscience findings related to memory.
4) The proposed model incorporates a forgetting function
that allows the model to simulate the human memory
system by selectively discarding outdated and incon-
sequential memories. The proposed active forgetting
strategy enhances the adaptability, online storage capac-
ity, and lifelong learning capacity of the model.
5) Our modeling results suggest that the brain’s diverse
neurons and neural mechanisms work synergistically
to achieve memory and cognitive tasks. The proposed
memory model not only offers some insights into human
memory but also provides an effective framework for
temporal sequence modeling.
II. M ETHOD
In this section, we first provide an overview of the model’s
structure and running procedures. We then introduce the neu-
ronal model, encoding, learning, and forgetting mechanisms,
as well as the prediction and retrieval processes in detail.
A. SNN-Based Sequential Memory Model
The proposed memory model is inspired by the structure
and computational properties of the human neocortex [33]. It is
organized in a hierarchy with each layer consisting of multiple
mini-columns [Fig. 1(a)]. Each mini-column in the proposed
memory model contains a multitude of dendritic-spiking
neurons (DS-neurons). DS-neurons draw inspiration from
pyramidal neurons, which exhibit a dendritic tree structure and
employ spike-based communication. As shown in Fig. 1(b),
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHANG et al.: TOW ARD BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE SEQUENTIAL MEMORY 10145
the DS-neuron has three different input zones: proximal zone,
distal zone, and apical zone, each populated with multiple
dendrites. The proximal and apical zones receive feedforward
inputs from lower layers and feedback inputs from higher
layers, respectively. The spikes originating from these zones
directly influence the neuronal membrane potential. While the
distal zone contains many dendritic segments each of which
contains a set of intralayer lateral connections. The spikes
delivered by these lateral connections do not directly affect
the neuronal membrane potential but instead accumulate to
trigger a dendritic spike on this segment, which in turn acts
on the neuronal membrane voltage.
As we progress through this hierarchy, information flow
from lower layers to higher layers (through the proximal zone)
in a feedforward manner. That is, multiple components from
lower layers converge onto a single element in a higher layer,
forming an aggregation of concepts. An illustrative example
of this phenomenon can be observed in language processing
where the transition from individual letters to words and
then subsequently to sentences showcases this progression.
On the contrary, the feedback connections on the apical zone
of DS-neurons allow information to flow from higher layers
to lower layers, resulting in the splitting of the aggregated
concept.
In addition, each layer has its own corresponding intrinsic
subthreshold neural oscillation V l
osc, which works as a pace-
maker. The frequency of this oscillation f l
osc is designed to
decrease gradually as we move from lower layers to higher
layers. This cross-frequency coupling mechanism enables a
proper timescale for binding lower level units into coherent
higher level concepts.
Prior to the learning process, memory items (exter-
nal input) are encoded using the sparse spatiotemporal
distributed (SSTD) encoding method, resulting in spatiotem-
poral spike patterns sparsely distributed across mini-columns
(Section II-C). During the first half cycle of oscillation,
the encoded spikes are presented to their respective mini-
columns (referred to as active mini-columns) via proximal
zones while inhibiting other mini-columns through activation
of the inhibitory mechanism. Meanwhile, as a result of inputs
transmitted by the intralayer connections on distal dendrites,
certain neurons within some mini-columns enter a depolarized
state known as predictive neurons. That is, when the membrane
potential of a dendritic segment V d (t) reaches the firing
threshold ϑd, it triggers the generation of a localized dendritic
spike as depicted in Fig. 2(c). Subsequently, this local dendritic
spike induces the soma to enter a depolarized state, also known
as the predictive state [34], where the membrane potential of
the neuron undergoes a rapid upward shift from its resting
potential, as illustrated in Fig. 2(d) (Section II-E).
The predictive neuron within each active mini-column gen-
erates a spike before its counterparts in the same mini-column,
effectively becoming the winner and suppressing the firing of
other neurons in that mini-column. If no predictive neurons
are present in an active mini-column, all neurons within that
mini-column will fire simultaneously. Subsequently, the gen-
erated spikes propagate through connected synapses and may
cause other neurons to fire local dendritic spikes, thus entering
Fig. 2. Prediction process of the DS-neuron. (a) Original intrinsic neuronal
oscillation. (b) Further simplification of DS-neuron, showing only the distal
dendrites of the neuron. Each synapse on a distal dendrite has a different
synaptic delay initialization at the time of generation, which causes these
synapses to shift the input spikes so that the distal dendrite is more likely to
generate dendrite spikes. (c) Dendritic spike is triggered when the potential
of a distal dendrite exceeds the threshold ϑd in response to multiple input
spikes. The dashed and solid arrows indicate the original and the delayed input
spikes, respectively. (d) and (e) Dendritic spike causes neuron depolarization
and phase precession (the neuronal oscillation is shifted to the trough) and
lasts for half a cycle. (f) Neuronal firing is caused by neural oscillation (after
phase precession) and depolarization in the absence of any other input.
a predictive state during the second half of the oscillation
cycle (Section II-E). Furthermore, the local dendritic spike
also facilitates phase precession, as shown in Fig. 2(e). In the
absence of external input in the following cycle, the shifted
neuronal oscillation works together with the depolarized state
to make the neuron fire ordered spikes without the need for
external inputs, thereby enabling the neuron to engage in
continuous predictions as depicted in Fig. 2(f), i.e., memory
retrieval (Section II-F).
The learning and forgetting processes occur simultaneously
in the first half of the oscillation, before the prediction. They
primarily rely on predictive neurons and active mini-columns,
which can be categorized into two scenarios: first, the pres-
ence of depolarized neurons within active mini-columns that
accurately predict incoming inputs, and second, the presence
of neurons in the remaining mini-columns that make incorrect
predictions. The details are described in Section II-D.
B. DS-Neuron
Overall, the proposed DS-neuron incorporates the tree struc-
ture and spike-based communication of biological neurons.
Next, we will provide a comprehensive explanation of the
operational procedures of a DS-neuron.
1) Dendritic Spike on Distal Dendrites: Consider an input
spike train to the dth dendritic segment of the ith cell in the
jth mini-column, sk(t) =∑
f δ(t − t f
k − dk), where t f
k is the
time of the f th spike of the kth synapse connected to the seg-
ment, dk is the transmission delay of the synapse [Fig. 2(b)].
δ(·) is the Dirac function, which is often used to represent
spikes in SNN. The incoming spikes will affect the membrane
potential of the postsynaptic dendrite. ak(t) = (κ ∗ sk)(t)
is used to define this affection by convolving sk(t) with a
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

10146 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
spike response kernel κ(t ) = V0[exp(−t/τ l
m) − exp(−t/τ l
s )],
where the layer-related parameters τ l
m and τ l
s jointly govern the
shape of the kernel. The dynamics of the dendritic membrane
potential can be defined as follows:
V d
i j(t) =
∑
k
ωk(κ ∗ sk)(t) + vrest =
(
W d
i j
)⊤
ad
i j(t) + vrest (1)
where V d
i j(t) is the membrane potential of the dth segment
of the ith neuron in the jth mini-column, ωk is the synaptic
weights of the kth synapse connected to the dendrite, and
W d
i j is the set of these weights. When the membrane potential
of a dendrite reaches its firing threshold ϑd (i.e., V d
i j(t) ≥ ϑd),
a local dendritic spike will be generated. After generating the
dendritic spike, the membrane potential of the dendrite reset
to the resting potential vrest = 0, as shown in Fig. 2(c).
2) Soma Depolarization Triggered by Dendritic Spikes:
Dendritic spike prompts the cell to enter a depolarized state
(i.e., predictive state) that the membrane potential increase
rapidly to vdep (i.e., distal input V dis
i j = vdep), and the status
will be maintained for a period of τdep (in this work, it equals
half a cycle) [35], [36], [37], as shown in Fig. 2(d). Although
the depolarized state is not enough to trigger a soma spike,
it is very important for information selection and continuous
prediction. For example, when receiving the same feedforward
inputs, the depolarized neuron fires earlier and activates the
inhibition mechanism to prevent the firing of other neurons
within the same mini-column. On the other hand, in the
absence of feedforward input, by joining with subthreshold
membrane potential oscillations, the depolarized neurons can
produce spikes, and transmit them to other neurons to make
continuous predictions [34].
3) Proximal Feedforward Input and Apical Feedback Input:
The proximal zone corresponds to feedforward inputs from
lower layers (the feedforward inputs of the bottom layer are
those external stimuli encoded as spike trains), and the apical
zone receives feedback spikes from higher layers. V pro,l
i j and
V api,l
i j denote the summed inputs from the l −1 and l +1 layer,
respectively. They are defined as V pro,l
i j (t) = ( ˆW l
i j)⊤ ˆa
l
i j(t) and
V api,l
i j (t) = ( ˇW l
i j)⊤ ˇa
l
i j(t), respectively. ˆW l
i j and ˇW l
i j represent
the weights of the synaptic connections on the proximal and
apical zones, and ˆal
i j and ˇal
i j represent the convolutional
values of the received spikes on the corresponding zones,
respectively. Unlike synapses on distal dendrites, both the
proximal synapses and apical synapses directly connect to the
soma without dendrites, so feedforward and feedback input
spikes directly affect the membrane potential. Note that the
memory model receives and processes the proximal inputs in
the first half of an oscillation cycle.
4) Neural Oscillation and Phase Precession: Neural oscil-
lation activity, especially theta and gamma oscillations, has
been widely observed at different levels of organization in
the brain and is thought to play a critical role in the pace-
making [38], information processing, memory, and other
cognitive tasks. In this work, the neuronal subthreshold mem-
brane potential oscillation is defined as a sine wave, as shown
in Figs. 2(a)–5(a)
V l
osc(t) = − Aoscsin
(
2π f l
osc + φ0
)
(2)
where Aosc is the amplitude, φ0 is the initial phase, and f l
osc is
the oscillation frequency in the lth layer. With different values
of f l
osc, the neuronal oscillations provide multiple timescale
pacemakers for different layers. From down to top in the
hierarchical model, the corresponding memory units become
longer (such as letter-word-sentence). Therefore, frequency
f l
osc gradually decreases with the increase of layers, effectively
aligning the cycle duration with the information content of
the memory unit. This cross-frequency coupling mechanism
enables proper timescale for information processing and bind-
ing lower level units into coherent high-level concepts.
The phase precession is a neurophysiological process related
to the action potential of neurons and the periodic rhythm
field potential, involving some neural representations of brain
regions, and supporting different aspects of cognition, learn-
ing, and memory [39], [40], [41], [42]. In the absence of the
feedforward inputs, the oscillation through phase precession
[Fig. 2(e)] works together with a neuron’s predictive state
to make a prediction by firing a spike [Fig. 2(f)]. Then,
the generated spike transmits to other neurons for further
prediction. Also, the oscillation goes back to the original
phase φ0.
5) Neuron Firing: In addition to the inputs received from its
three zones, i.e., proximal zone, distal zone, and apical zone,
the membrane potential of a DS-neuron is also affected by
neural oscillation, inhibitory feedback, and refractory periods.
To distinguish the neuron’s membrane potential in different
layers, V l
i j(t) is used to denote the membrane potential of the
ith neuron in the jth mini-column of layer l, and it is specified
by
V l
i j(t) = V pro,l
i j (t) + V api,l
i j (t) + V dis,l
i j
+ V l
inh(t) + V l
osc(t) + η
(
t − tl
i j
)
(3)
where V l
inh(t) is the inhibitory feedback from other mini-
columns. When the membrane potential of a neuron at time t
is the largest among all neurons within the same mini-column
and exceeds the given threshold ϑ, it triggers a spike and
produces intracolumn inhibition to these other neurons, until
the end of the cycle. In the experiments, we simply set it to
a constant large enough to ensure that the suppressed neurons
cannot fire. Also, the fired neurons will no longer fire in this
cycle under the influence of the refractory period, which is
modeled by the kernel η(t − tl
i j), where tl
i j denotes the firing
time of this neuron in this cycle. η(t − tl
i j) = −ϑ if t > tl
i j
(t belongs to the current oscillation cycle), otherwise η(t ) = 0.
C. Encoding
Various neuroscience findings support that the spike tem-
poral coding and sparse distribution coding are involved in
memory formation [43], [44], [45]. Inspired by these, we pro-
pose an SSTD method to encode different types of memory
items into spatiotemporal patterns of several mini-columns.
Although the exact SSTD encoding differs for each type
of external input, they all consist of three separate sparse
representations from different aspects.
1) Column Aspect: Only a few mini-columns are chosen to
encode a memory item. These selected mini-columns
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHANG et al.: TOW ARD BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE SEQUENTIAL MEMORY 10147
Fig. 3. SSTD coding strategy. (a) Encoding of real-value data. The data
x is represented as the ordered spike time of mini-columns C5, C6, C4, C7,
and C3 (K = 5), and the data in the gray shaded area corresponds to the
same representation. (b) Encoding of periodic data. For example, for 24 h of
the day, the coding of 23 o’clock, 0 o’clock, and 1 o’clock should overlap,
so the distribution of mini-columns in (a) is changed to a circular form.
(c) Encoding of discrete symbols. A symbol is encoded as the ordered spike
time of several random mini-columns (two mini-columns in this figure). For
example, triggering C3 before C4 represents B, and vice versa represents D.
Also, in the mini-column C3, the neuron C32 (dashed edge) and C34 (solid
edge) represent different context information (CB and AB) because C32 is
connected to C, while C34 is connected to A.
prevent other mini-columns from being fired by an
intercolumn inhibition mechanism, which maintains the
sparsity of the encoding.
2) Neuron Aspect: All neurons within a mini-column
represent the same memory item, yet assume dis-
tinct representations of this item in varying contexts.
As a result, typically only one neuron in an active
mini-column is selected for any given context.
3) Temporal Aspect: Different firing orders of the same
mini-columns represent different information, in other
words, the temporal information participates in both
feedforward inputs and sequence context representation.
This spike timing-based encoding significantly increases
memory capacity.
Specifically, an input item is encoded as the proximal
input spike times of K mini-columns (approximately 2%–10%
of the total mini-columns in the layer), one for each mini-
column. But in fact, we are more concerned with the order of
these input spikes, rather than their precise timing. Different
items can be represented by different input orders of the
same K mini-columns, which can greatly expand the coding
capacity.
1) Encoding of Real-Value Data: For real-valued data, such
as the number of taxi passengers, the encoded representation
should maintain the correlation between the data, i.e., close
numbers correspond to similar representations. Thus, the idea
of Gaussian population coding [46], [47] is referenced: Each
mini-column has its receptive field (simulated by a Gaussian
function) and only responds to data that falls within its
receptive field. The receptive fields of these mini-columns
are distributed with an interval of l, and together cover the
data range to be encoded. Enter the data into the function
group, and the mini-columns whose output values rank in the
top K constitute the representation of the data. Therefore, the
encoding resolution is l/2, as shown in Fig. 3(a), the data in
the gray shaded area correspond to the same representation.
After the coded mini-columns and the corresponding order are
determined, the exact input time can be evenly distributed in
the first half of the oscillation.
2) Encoding of Periodic Data: The starting point and
ending point of periodic data (such as the time of day, day of
the week,and month) are adjacent to each other, so their coding
results should reflect this closeness. In order to achieve this,
it is only necessary to arrange Gaussian functions in real-value
encoding in a ring, covering the data range, as shown in
Fig. 3(b). This simple operation ensures that the minimum
and maximum values of the data are encoded similarly.
3) Encoding of Discrete Symbols: Since there is no relation-
ship between different symbols (the semantics of symbols are
not considered in this work), the encoding of discrete symbols
only needs to ensure that a symbol has its fixed representation.
Therefore, K mini-columns (in order) are randomly selected
to represent a symbol, and their proximal input spike times are
evenly distributed over the first half of the oscillation. Note
that for the same several mini-columns, different fire orders
also represent different symbols. Different neurons firing at
the same time in the same mini-column represent different
context information, as shown in Fig. 3(c).
Overall, SSTD is a coding method that targets mini-columns
rather than neurons, offering a substantial coding capacity. It is
not tailored for specific input types; rather, it can be easily
adapted to various input types with minimal adjustments,
including real values, text, and time.
D. Learning and Forgetting
Learning (memory) and forgetting are commonly attributed
to the modification of synaptic strength through the Hebbian
rule or its temporally asymmetric form spike timing-dependent
plasticity (STDP) [17], [48], [49]. However, recent evidence
challenges this synaptic strength-based theory and suggests
important roles of the synaptic delay [50], [51], [52] and
structural plasticity [53], [54], [55], [56], [57]. Inspired by
these neuroscience findings, a hybrid learning rule, considers
the plasticity of synaptic connection strength, synaptic delay,
and network structure, is employed in the memory formulation
process. On the other hand, the active forgetting function
is an indispensable part of the memory system and plays a
crucial role in memory updating and flexibility [30], [31], [32].
To leverage the advantage of forgetting, a forgetting mecha-
nism is equipped in our memory model to forget unimportant
and old knowledge to promote online memory performance.
In the proposed model, we initialize with an empty network,
and the connections and properties of synapses are formed
and modified through learning. Each synapse in the model
is characterized by weight ω, delay d, and age α. The
weight denotes the efficacy of a connection and the delay
represents its transmission time (once determined, it will
not change unless the synapse disappears), while the age
tracks the number of learning events that have occurred in
a neuron since the synapse last participated in learning. The
importance of a memory item is determined by its familiarity
and age, i.e., synaptic weights (strengths) ω and synaptic
ages α, respectively. The model exhibits two distinct forms of
plasticity: Intralayer plasticity and interlayer plasticity, which,
respectively, pertain to the synapses within the same layer
and those that span across layers. Then according to the
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

10148 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
designed synaptic plasticity, the active memory fade involves
the depression of synaptic weights and the aging of synapses.
1) Intralayer Plasticity: The goal of intralayer plasticity
is to formulate the sequential memory by updating synap-
tic weights, synaptic delays, and network structure. Here,
we simply denote the pair of neurons that establish intralayer
connections by i (presynaptic) and j (postsynaptic). ωi j, di j,
and αi j, respectively, represent the connection weight, delay
and age. Also, ti and t j represent their corresponding firing
time. The intralayer plasticity, specifically, can be divided into
the following three scenarios:
1) If a neuron is in a predictive state (depolarized) and
subsequently generates a soma spike due to the proximal
input, a “learning event” is triggered in the neuron.
All contributed synapses in the dendritic segment that
caused the predictive state are both strengthened (ω i j ←
ωi j + δω) and rejuvenated (α i j ← 0). On the other hand,
all the other synapses in the active dendritic segment and
other nonactive dendritic segments are both weakened
(ωi j ← ωi j − δω) and aging (α i j ← αi j + 1).
2) If there is no predictive neuron in a mini-column that
presented proximal input, we first try to find the best
matching segment that the active synapse (those whose
transmitted spikes arrive at the same time) is above a
critical number Lmatch. Then, the selected segment is
reinforced by updating these active synapses: ωi j ←
ωi j + δω and αi j ← 0, and growing new synapses with
winners in the previous cycle. When there are no best-
matching segments, the neuron with the fewest segments
is selected to add a new segment and grow new synapses
with winners in the previous cycle. All new synapses are
initialized with synaptic weight ωi j = ω0, delay di j =
t j − ti − π and age αi j = 0.
3) If the predictive neuron fails to activate due to the
absence of input spikes, it indicates an incorrect pre-
diction. Consequently, the synapses contributing to this
prediction should be depressed by reducing the synaptic
weights (ωi j ← ωi j−δ′
ω) and the age should be increased
(αi j ← αi j + 1).
2) Interlayer Plasticity: The higher level concepts are also
encoded by the SSTD method and several mini-columns are
activated in a specified order. The feedforward and feedback
synapses between the lower level neurons and the higher level
mini-columns are established to form the “aggregation” of the
lower level items; that is, one higher level item corresponds
to multiple lower level items. We simply use tpre and tpost to
represent the firing time of the lower neuron i and the upper
mini-column j that establish the interlayer synapse. During the
memory process, both the feedforward and feedback synapses
are updated simultaneously. Specifically, for layer l and layer
l +1, the interlayer plasticity can be divided into the following
three scenarios:
1) If the input from a mini-column in layer l fails to
contribute to the firing of the corresponding mini-column
in layer l +1, a feedforward synapse is generated on the
proximal zone of the higher level mini-column and ini-
tialized: ˇωi j = ω0, ˇdi j = tpost −tpre, and ˇαi j = 0. At the
same time, a new feedback synapse is generated on the
Fig. 4. Schematic of a multilayer model. (a) Three-layer network that stores
a sentence S : DO IT. For ease of viewing, intralayer connections are not
presented. (b) Proximal synaptic delays of the upper layer mini-columns.
(c) Apical synaptic delays of the lower layer neurons. (d) Spikes fired by
the corresponding mini-columns in the three-layer network during memory.
(e) Spikes fired by the corresponding mini-columns in the three-layer network
during goal-based retrieval.
apical zone of the lower level neuron and initialized:
ˆωi j = ω0, ˆdi j = tl+1
max −tl
min +tpre −tpost, ˆαi j = 0. Where
tl+1
max represents the maximum firing time among several
mini-columns of layer l +1 corresponding to the current
input item, and tl
min represents the minimum firing time
among all lower level mini-columns corresponding to
this upper level item, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
2) If the input from a lower level neuron successfully
causes the corresponding higher level mini-column to
fire at the coded time, the contributed feedforward
synapses and corresponding feedback connections are
strengthened and juvenated: ˆωi j ← ˆ ωi j + δω and
ˆα ← 0; and ˇωi j ← ˇωi j + δω and ˇα ← 0.
3) If the lower input spikes make the wrong higher mini-
columns fire, the contributed feedforward synapses and
corresponding feedback connections are weakened and
aged: ˆωi j ← ˆωi j − δ′
ω and ˆα ← ˆα + 1; and ˇωi j ←
ˇωi j − δ′
ω and ˇα ← ˇα + 1.
3) Forgetting: To measure the possibility of being for-
gotten, we define a forgetting function for each synapse as
f = L ω(1 − ω) + Laα, where L ω and La are the two
parameters to determine the importance of familiarity and age.
When the value of f reaches the forgetting threshold ϑ f , the
corresponding synapse is deleted to perform forgetting. This
“strength-age depression” strategy is employed in our model
to substantially increase online storage capacity and flexibility.
In summary, the integration of multiple plasticity and for-
getting mechanisms allows the model to retain frequently
occurring memories while discarding irrelevant ones. Con-
sequently, these components collectively contribute to the
model’s unified and robust functionality. Each component is
crucial for the model’s optimal performance.
E. Prediction
The proximal and apical zones of the DS-neuron are
dedicated to receiving feedforward inputs from lower layers
(or external inputs) and feedback inputs from higher layers,
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHANG et al.: TOW ARD BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE SEQUENTIAL MEMORY 10149
respectively. The spikes detected in proximal and apical zones
have a direct contribution to the neuronal membrane poten-
tial, which are denoted by V pro(t) and V api(t), respectively,
as in (3). The distal zone, on the other hand, is dedicated to
observing the neuronal activities in the same layer. As shown
in Fig. 2(b), there are many dendritic segments in the distal
zone, and each segment contains a set of lateral connections
characterized by synaptic weights and synaptic delays. When
the membrane potential V d
k (t) of a dendritic segment k reaches
the firing threshold ϑd, a local dendritic spike will be generated
[Fig. 2(c)] and causes the cell body to enter a depolarized
state. That is, the distal membrane voltage V dis(t) suddenly
increases by a positive potential vdep, as shown in Fig. 2(d),
and the neuron becomes a predictive neuron.
The membrane potential dynamics of a DS-neuron is also
governed by the layer-dependent intrinsic neuronal subthresh-
old oscillation V l
osc(t) [Fig. 2(a)]. When a neuron enters the
depolarized state, the phase precession immediately happens
to make the neuronal oscillation shift to the valley [Fig. 2(e)].
Then, the shifted neuronal oscillation can work together with
the depolarized state to make the predictive neuron fire a
spike, even without input spikes, for further prediction and
computation [Fig. 2(f)].
F . Retrieval
The proposed model can perform contextual retrieval and
goal-based retrieval corresponding to intralayer plasticity
on lateral synapses and interlayer plasticity on cross-layer
synapses, respectively.
1) Contextual Retrieval: To illustrate the process of con-
textual retrieval, consider a simple sequence A → B → C,
as shown in Fig. 5(b). In the memory process, each memory
item of this sequence is encoded as spike times of sparse mini-
columns, and then presented to the memory model in the first
half of each cycle one by one. According to the intraplasticity,
some neurons in these coding mini-columns are selected as
winners (deep red) to make connections with winners in the
last cycle.
In this contextual retrieval task, the item A is presented
to the memory model, and then, the model is expected to
progressively retrieve the elements B and C. The input of
A makes the corresponding mini-columns fire spikes (pink
arrows) in encoded order. In the second half cycle, these
spikes are transmitted to some neurons corresponding to B,
making them predictive neurons (green), accompanied by
phase precession, as shown in Fig. 5(c). Fig. 5(d) uses a
predictive neuron of B as an example to illustrate how the
depolarized state works together with the shifted neuronal
oscillation to retrieve the item B. Then, the fired spikes of
B further make the neurons corresponding to C fire spikes to
complete the contextual retrieval, and Fig. 5(e) illustrates the
membrane potential dynamics of a predictive neuron of C.
2) Goal-Based Retrieval: To illustrate the process of goal-
based retrieval, consider a two-word sentence S : DO IT,
where S stands for the concept of the sentence DO IT as
a whole. As shown in Fig. 4(a), a three-layer memory model
corresponding to “letter-word-sentence” is established. During
Fig. 5. Contextual retrieval. (a) Neural oscillation. (b) Learning process of
sequence A → B → C. Elements are input into the model successively to
activate corresponding encoding mini-columns (red). Also, a neuron with the
fewest distal dendrites (dark red) in each of these mini-columns is selected as
winner to establish connections with winners in the last cycle. (c) Retrieval
process. Enter A, the neurons connected with the winners of A first enter
the depolarization state (green), and then are activated in the first half of
the next cycle (dark red), B is retrieved. C is then retrieved in the same
way. (d) and (e) During retrieval, the membrane voltage trajectories of one
of the predicted cells correspond to B and C. The states of the mini-columns
(nine mini-columns in total) in the model are shown correspondingly with the
oscillation period.
learning, intra-layer connections are established between mini-
columns (corresponding to different letters) in the bottom
layer, and between mini-columns (corresponding to different
words) in the middle layer. The interlayer connections are
built between the lower layer neurons and the upper layer
mini-columns [the setting of synaptic delays is shown in
Fig. 4(b) and (c)]. For example, the neurons in the bot-
tom mini-columns representing the letters D (orange) and O
(green) are connected to the middle mini-columns represent-
ing the word DO (cyan), while the neurons in the middle
mini-columns representing the words DO and IT (red) are
connected to the top neuron representing the sentence S (blue).
The activation sequence of mini-columns in the three layers
is shown in Fig. 4(d).
When the concept of sentence S is presented to the memory
model, the corresponding mini-column in the sentence level
will generate a spike. Due to the learned interlayer synapses,
neurons in the word level will receive the spike directly from
the top layer and produce spikes in order. Fig. 4(e) shows
an example of the process of goal-based retrieval. During the
goal-based retrieval, the learned interlayer synapses play a
dominant role due to their strong and direct contribution, and
the contribution of intralayer synapses can be neglected.
III. E XPERIMENTS
A. Parameter Setting
Unless specifically stated, the default values for certain
parameters are displayed in Table I. The initial phase dif-
ference of neural oscillation between two adjacent layers is
π. The forgetting threshold ϑ f serves as a crucial parameter
that balances the retention of recent input with historical
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

10150 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
TABLE I
PARAMETER SETTING
Fig. 6. Data for the sequence prediction task. (a) Sequence stream formed
by concatenating sequences, separated by random noise symbols. Bounded by
the orange bar, the endings of these sequences that make up the stream are
swapped, as in (b). (b) Sequences with only one possible ending. (c) Sequences
with multiple possible endings (two possible endings are shown here).
information. Its optimal value varies across different exper-
iments. In the sequence recall task with the highest real-time
requirements, the forgetting thresholds for single and multiple
predictions are set to 25 and 50, respectively. For the taxi pas-
senger prediction experiment, the threshold is adjusted to 65.
Conversely, in the sentence memory task, which emphasizes
preserving extensive historical memory, the threshold is raised
to 500. Lmatch is a crucial parameter in intralayer plasticity that
determines a dendrite’s eligibility to participate in learning.
Besides being set to 4 in the taxi task, it is configured to 3 in
all other experiments.
B. Rapid Online Learning and Robust Recall
In this section, we conduct experiments to verify the online
learning capability and adaptability of the proposed model by
learning streaming data. As depicted in Fig. 6(a), the streaming
data is constructed by a mixture of letter sequences and noise
symbols [58]. The letter sequences are randomly drawn from
a predefined sequence set. As shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c),
each sequence consists of three parts: the start part, shared
subsequence, and end part. The noise elements are randomly
chosen from a set of 50 000 elements (excluding those used in
the predefined sequence set). In this task, the memory model
consists of a one-layer network comprising 200 mini-columns,
each containing ten neurons.
In the first task, the sequences in the streaming data are
selected from the set as shown in Fig. 6(b), and each sequence
has only one possible ending. For example, the sequences
“G I H E C D A” and “B I H E C D F” share the subsequence
“I H E C D,” whereas sequences beginning with G end
with A, and sequences beginning with B end with F. The
model is trained to predict the final element of each sequence,
requiring it to retain contextual information from the initial
element to achieve accurate predictions and demonstrate its
ability to capture long-term dependencies. Each element in
the sequence is encoded by a random ten mini-columns out of
these 200 mini-columns (sparse symbol encoding), and these
coded spikes are sequentially fed into the memory model.
The memory model learns in an online manner without an
explicit switch between learning and testing. As the elements
are presented to the memory model sequentially, we track the
accuracy of predicting the last element of each sequence over
time and report the ratio of correct predictions. We compare
the performance of different sequential learning methods on
this task and the experimental results are presented in Fig. 7.
While the final prediction accuracy among different methods
is comparable, the proposed memory model achieves the best
prediction accuracy much faster than other methods, such
as HTM [58], TDNN [59], and LSTM [60]. The proposed
model can achieve perfect prediction after observing only
around 1000 elements, outperforming TDNN and HTM which
require around 3000 and 5000 elements, respectively. The
highest accuracy achieved by ELM [61], online LSTM, and
LSTM-1000 remains below 1. Furthermore, unlike LSTM,
the proposed model inherently supports online learning and
does not require segmenting the streaming data into predefined
chunks and presenting repeatedly.
After presenting 10 000 elements [orange line in Fig. 7(a)],
all the methods achieve stable performance. Given the inher-
ently dynamic nature of streaming data characterized by rapid
temporal variations, we investigate the adaptability of the
proposed memory model to such dynamic changes. To assess
this adaptability, we alter the streaming data by swapping
the last elements of each pair of sequences within the set,
as illustrated in Fig. 6(b), and subsequently presenting the
altered data to the model. This task requires the memory
model to effectively manage both forgetting and learning
processes, namely actively forgetting old sequences while
rapidly learning new ones. As illustrated in Fig. 7(c), the
proposed model demonstrates rapid adaptation to the altered
sequences, achieving perfect prediction accuracy after expo-
sure to 2500 elements. This notable performance can be
attributed to the active forgetting mechanism and the one-shot
rapid learning employed by the model.
In the context of the multiple prediction task, sequences
within the streaming data are selected from the set as illus-
trated in Fig. 6(c), which have multiple possible endings. For
example, the sequences “G I H E C D A,” “G I H E C
D F,” “B I H E C D K,” and “B I H E C D J” share the
subsequence “I H E C D.” Sequences beginning with G have
two possible endings: A and F, and sequences beginning with
B have two possible endings: K and J. Specifically, we evaluate
sequences with two and four endings, respectively. In the
case where a sequence presents two (four) distinct endings,
a correct prediction is defined by results of no more than
two (four) and including the correct ending. The evaluation
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHANG et al.: TOW ARD BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE SEQUENTIAL MEMORY 10151
Fig. 7. Experimental results for the sequence prediction tasks. (a) Online prediction accuracy is calculated over a stream of sequences formed by concatenating
artificially constructed sequences, each with a single possible ending. This represents the moving average of the last 100 sequences. These sequences contain
four sequences of the sixth-order and four sequences of the seventh order. The sequence configurations change after the models process 10 000 elements,
indicated by the orange vertical line. (b) and (c) Final prediction accuracy achieved by various models along with the corresponding number of elements
required both before and after data modification. The horizontal bars denote standard deviations in the number of required elements while the vertical bars
denote the standard deviations in accuracy. (d) and (e) Online prediction accuracies for sequence streams composed of artificially constructed sequences,
each having two or four potential endings. The dataset comprises four groups of sixth-order sequences and four groups of seventh-order sequences. The gray
shadow represents the standard deviation of the proposed model across ten trials. The standard deviations of other models are not shown for clarity. The
results of other baseline models in the current figure as well as Figs. 8(b) and (c) and 9 come from [58].
of prediction accuracy is illustrated in Fig. 7(d) and (e)
which shows that the proposed model can rapidly achieve an
accuracy equal to 1 when compared with other methods. For
the case involving two predictions, our model stabilizes at an
accuracy of 1 after processing only around 3600 elements,
whereas HTM requires over 4300 elements. In the case of four
predictions, where the task becomes more challenging, HTM
requires 10 000 elements to approach a perfect prediction,
whereas our model achieves a similar level of accuracy with
only about 4400 elements.
C. Superior Memory Capacity
This section explores the memory capacity assessment of
the proposed memory model. The initial evaluation involves
testing the efficacy of the single-layer structure in storing and
recalling sentences from the Children’s Book Test (CBT) [62].
The model comprises 100 mini-columns, each containing ten
neurons. Sentences used for assessment are at least ten words
long, with each word encoded by ten mini-columns using the
discrete symbol encoding method. The first ten words of the
selected sentence are sequentially presented to the single-layer
model for the learning process. Subsequently, the first six
words are input, and the retrieval task involves recalling the
remaining four words. The Levenshtein distance [63] is used
as the metric for measuring the similarity between the retrieved
content and the desired response (an English word or a Chinese
character is treated as a character for Levenshtein distance
calculation). A lower Levenshtein distance value indicates
a higher similarity between the retrieved sentence and the
original one. In order to measure memory capacity, the number
of sentences used for evaluation is systematically increased
from 100 to 1000.
The experimental results show that as the number of
symbols increases, the Levenshtein distance for all meth-
ods also increases in a consistent pattern. However, the
impact of the number of symbols on the performance of
LUMAKG, HTM, and our proposed method remains negli-
gible, as depicted in Fig. 8(a). Notably, when the number of
symbols reaches 10 000, the mean Levenshtein distances for
LUMAKG [64], HTM, and our proposed method are 0.75, 0.5,
and 0.2, respectively. In contrast, under identical conditions,
the mean Levenshtein distances for ANAKG [65] and LSTM
are approximately 3.5 and 3.2, respectively. The achievement
of a minimal Levenshtein distance by the proposed method
signifies its superior memory capacity compared with existing
models.
Considering the comparable memory capacities of our
model and HTM, we evaluate their ability to memorize
1000 sentences under resource constraints involving reductions
in the number of mini-columns and neurons per mini-column.
As illustrated in Fig. 8(b), the memory performance of both
HTM and our proposed method shows a significant correlation
with the number of neurons in each mini-column. Typically,
a higher number of neurons per mini-column corresponds to
better memory performance. This is due to the fact that the
number of neurons in a mini-column is related to the number
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

10152 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
Fig. 8. Results of the sentence memory task. (a) Memory capacity of different models for sentences. Each sentence consists of ten words. After training, the
first six words are used as input, and the remaining four words must be retrieved. Memory performance is evaluated using the average Levenshtein distance
between the retrieved sentence and the original sentence. A larger distance indicates poorer memory recall, reflecting a smaller memory capacity. Results from
other comparison methods are taken from [64]. (b) Effect of network size on memory performance. M represents the number of neurons in each mini-column.
The mean and standard deviation across ten trials are shown in the figure. (c) Memory performance of the multilayer network. The task involves memorizing
five-character quatrains of ancient Chinese poems using a three-layer network. “-S” denotes a single-layer network. Context-based retrieval provides the first
line of the poem, requiring the network to retrieve the remaining three lines. Goal-based retrieval only provides the title of the poem, requiring the network
to retrieve the entire poem.
of contexts it can remember. With fewer neurons in a mini-
column, the model can only retain limited context, especially
for high-frequency words in the dataset, such as “a” and “the”.
On the other hand, the number of mini-columns also affects the
memory capacity. A decrease in mini-columns leads to a rapid
increase in the average Levenshtein distance for HTM, indicat-
ing that the data has exceeded its memory capacity. However,
the reduction of mini-columns has a minimal effect on our
model. This is because of the SSTD encoding strategy which
enhances representation on a temporal scale. Consequently,
even with only 50 mini-columns, the model can encode a
substantial number of elements. These results validate our
analysis, highlighting the significant improvement in memory
capacity facilitated by the employed SSTD encoding method.
D. Practical Application in Time-Series Prediction
In this section, the proposed memory model is compared
with other memory models to predict time-series data in a real-
world scenario. The data comes from the publicly available
taxi passenger data from the New York City Transportation
Authority [66], which is aggregated every half hour, resulting
in 17 520 records from a year’s data. Each record contains
three values: day of the week, time of day, and number of
passengers. For the values of “day of the week” and “time
of day,” a periodic data encoding method is used, and for the
“number of passengers,” a real-value data encoding method
is used (Section (II-C)). The three values are encoded by ten
mini-columns, respectively. The total number of mini-columns
used to memorize these three types of data is 30, 58, and 482
(570 mini-columns in total), and each mini-column contains
32 neurons. The task is to predict the number of passengers
after 2.5 h (five steps in advance) based on the historical data.
As shown in Fig. 9(a), the data items show rich temporal
dynamics, which requires the model to have sufficient memory
ability and excellent real-time processing ability. The mean
absolute percentage error (MAPE) [58] is used to evaluate the
performance by calculating the deviations between the most
likely prediction results and the actual data.
Fig. 9. Task of forecasting the number of taxi passengers. (a) Chart of
changes in the number of taxi passengers in a week at 30-min intervals.
(b) MAPE of the passenger number predictions of different models on the
original data. (c) MAPE of the passenger number predictions of different
models on modified data. (d) Changes in MAPE of several models after
data modification (starting from the yellow vertical line). LSTM models are
repeatedly trained on every week’s data (separated by gray vertical lines).
Experimental results show that the prediction ability of
the proposed model is better than that of several time-series
prediction models, such as ARIAM [67], ELM, TDNN, and
ESN [68], and the error is only slightly higher than HTM
and partial LSTM models [Fig. 9(b)]. Then, we reduced the
number of passengers on weekday mornings (7–11 A.M.)
by 20% and increased the number on weekday evenings
(9–11 P.M.) by 20% after April 1, 2015. It can be seen
from Fig. 9(c) that the MAPE of all models increases, but
the proposed model has the lowest increase, thus achieving
lower MAPE than LSTM 3000, LSTM 6000, and HTM. The
LSTM models require repeated training on buffered datasets
containing the past 3000 and 6000 records. The improvement
of LSTM prediction ability depends on the size of the buffered
dataset but at the cost of damaging the adaptability to new
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHANG et al.: TOW ARD BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE SEQUENTIAL MEMORY 10153
data. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 9(d), the MAPE of the two
LSTM models rose rapidly after data changes, and then slowly
decreased after a long time. While the proposed model and
HTM only require a glance at each sample in the continuous
input stream. Compared with HTM, the original prediction
results of the proposed model are slightly worse, possibly
due to the forgetting mechanism leading to less retention of
historical information. However, the mechanism also allows it
to adapt more quickly to data changes.
IV. C ONCLUSION
The ability to store and retrieve experiences through mem-
ory is an essential component of human intelligence and
identity. The process of memory formation involves the
streaming of experience into durable memory traces, which
can be preserved for long periods and used in service of
present or future events. However, the mechanisms responsible
for learning and forgetting in the memory system remain
unresolved. Over the years, numerous memory models have
been developed based on biological networks, but none have
achieved human-level performance in storage and retrieval pro-
cesses due to oversimplification and a lack of consideration of
key factors such as dendritic specialization, diverse plasticity
mechanisms, and diverse neural mechanisms.
In this article, we present a brain-inspired memory model
that integrates various neuroscience findings and addresses
some of these limitations. The proposed model employs
dendritic spiking neurons and spike timing-based encod-
ing to support distributed event-driven computation. It also
incorporates various forms of plasticity mechanisms, includ-
ing synaptic strength, synaptic delay, and model structure,
to enable one-shot and online learning without disrupting prior
learning. The model further investigates the functional roles of
neural mechanisms underlying memory storage and retrieval,
including neural oscillation and phase precession. In addi-
tion, the model incorporates an active forgetting function to
enhance adaptability, memory capacity, and facilitate lifelong
learning. Overall, the proposed memory model provides an
unprecedented framework for understanding the complexity
of human memory and cognitive tasks while also providing
an effective solution for temporal sequence problems. Our
future work will extend the proposed method to more practical
applications [69], [70], [71].
REFERENCES
[1] D. L. Schacter, “Constructive memory: Past and future,” Dialogues Clin.
Neurosci., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 7–18, Mar. 2012.
[2] L. Sherwood, Human Physiology: From Cells to Systems . Boston, MA,
USA: Cengage Learning, 2015.
[3] S. A. Josselyn and S. Tonegawa, “Memory engrams: Recalling the
past and imagining the future,” Science, vol. 367, no. 6473, 2020,
Art. no. eaaw4325.
[4] J. Hu, H. Tang, K. C. Tan, and H. Li, “How the brain formulates
memory: A spatio-temporal model research frontier,” IEEE Comput.
Intell. Mag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 56–68, May 2016.
[5] X. Wu, G. C. Mel, D. J. Strouse, and B. W. Mel, “How dendrites
affect online recognition memory,” PLOS Comput. Biol., vol. 15, no. 5,
May 2019, Art. no. e1006892.
[6] Z. Zhu, M. C. Anderson, and Y . Wang, “Inducing forgetting of unwanted
memories through subliminal reactivation,” Nature Commun., vol. 13,
no. 1, p. 6496, Oct. 2022.
[7] A. Guskjolen and M. S. Cembrowski, “Engram neurons: Encoding,
consolidation, retrieval, and forgetting of memory,” Mol. Psychiatry,
vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 3207–3219, Aug. 2023.
[8] J. M. Sabandal, J. A. Berry, and R. L. Davis, “Dopamine-based mecha-
nism for transient forgetting,” Nature, vol. 591, no. 7850, pp. 426–430,
Mar. 2021.
[9] C. H. Tan, H. Tang, E. Y . Cheu, and J. Hu, “A computationally efficient
associative memory model of hippocampus CA3 by spiking neurons,”
in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Aug. 2013, pp. 1–8.
[10] J. Hu, H. Tang, K. C. Tan, and S. B. Gee, “A spiking neural network
model for associative memory using temporal codes,” in Proc. 18th Asia
Pacific Symp. Intell. Evol. Syst., vol. 1. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2015, pp. 561–572.
[11] D. Zipser, B. Kehoe, G. Littlewort, and J. Fuster, “A spiking network
model of short-term active memory,” J. Neurosci., vol. 13, no. 8,
pp. 3406–3420, Aug. 1993.
[12] F. Fiebig and A. Lansner, “A spiking working memory model based on
Hebbian short-term potentiation,” J. Neurosci., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 83–96,
Jan. 2017.
[13] F. Zenke, E. J. Agnes, and W. Gerstner, “Diverse synaptic plasticity
mechanisms orchestrated to form and retrieve memories in spiking
neural networks,” Nat. Commun., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2015.
[14] J. Raymondi Silva et al., “Skin-resident dendritic cells mediate postop-
erative pain via CCR4 on sensory neurons,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,
vol. 119, no. 4, Jan. 2022, Art. no. e2118238119.
[15] V . H. Cornejo, N. Ofer, and R. Yuste, “V oltage compartmentalization
in dendritic spines in vivo,” Science, vol. 375, no. 6576, pp. 82–86,
Jan. 2022.
[16] H. Markram, J. Lübke, M. Frotscher, and B. Sakmann, “Regulation
of synaptic efficacy by coincidence of postsynaptic APs and EPSPs,”
Science, vol. 275, no. 5297, pp. 213–215, Jan. 1997.
[17] G.-Q. Bi and M.-M. Poo, “Synaptic modifications in cultured hip-
pocampal neurons: Dependence on spike timing, synaptic strength, and
postsynaptic cell type,” J. Neurosci., vol. 18, no. 24, pp. 10464–10472,
Dec. 1998.
[18] M. Xu et al., “Adaptive synaptic scaling in spiking networks for
continual learning and enhanced robustness,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 5151–5165, Mar. 2025.
[19] Y . Hu, L. Deng, Y . Wu, M. Yao, and G. Li, “Advancing spiking neural
networks toward deep residual learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 2353–2367, Feb. 2025.
[20] M. Zhang et al., “Supervised learning in spiking neural networks
with synaptic delay-weight plasticity,” Neurocomputing, vol. 409,
pp. 103–118, Oct. 2020.
[21] P. Sun, J. Wu, M. Zhang, P. Devos, and D. Botteldooren, “Delay learning
based on temporal coding in spiking neural networks,” Neural Netw.,
vol. 180, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 106678.
[22] R. Lamprecht and J. LeDoux, “Structural plasticity and memory,” Nature
Rev. Neurosci., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 45–54, Jan. 2004.
[23] N. A. Herweg, E. A. Solomon, and M. J. Kahana, “Theta oscillations
in human memory,” Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 208–227,
Mar. 2020.
[24] I. E. J. de Vries, H. A. Slagter, and C. N. L. Olivers, “Oscillatory
control over representational states in working memory,” Trends Cogn.
Sci., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 150–162, Feb. 2020.
[25] E. K. Miller, M. Lundqvist, and A. M. Bastos, “Working memory 2.0,”
Neuron, vol. 100, no. 2, pp. 463–475, Oct. 2018.
[26] J. Jaramillo and R. Kempter, “Phase precession: A neural code
underlying episodic memory?” Current Opinion Neurobiol., vol. 43,
pp. 130–138, Apr. 2017.
[27] S. J. C. Venditto, B. Le, and E. L. Newman, “Place cell assemblies
remain intact, despite reduced phase precession, after cholinergic dis-
ruption,” Hippocampus, vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 1075–1090, Nov. 2019.
[28] N. Axmacher, F. Mormann, G. Fernández, C. E. Elger, and J. Fell,
“Memory formation by neuronal synchronization,” Brain Res. Rev.,
vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 170–182, 2006.
[29] J. Fell and N. Axmacher, “The role of phase synchronization in
memory processes,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 105–118,
Feb. 2011.
[30] R. L. Davis and Y . Zhong, “The biology of forgetting—A perspective,”
Neuron, vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 490–503, 2017.
[31] T. Kitazono, S. Hara-Kuge, O. Matsuda, A. Inoue, M. Fujiwara, and
T. Ishihara, “Multiple signaling pathways coordinately regulate forget-
ting of olfactory adaptation through control of sensory responses in
Caenorhabditis elegans,” J. Neurosci., vol. 37, no. 42, pp. 10240–10251,
2017.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

10154 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2025
[32] U. Patel et al., “Transcriptional changes before and after forgetting of
a long-term sensitization memory in aplysia californica,” Neurobiol.
Learn. Memory, vol. 155, pp. 474–485, Nov. 2018.
[33] J. Hawkins, S. Ahmad, and D. Dubinsky, “Cortical learning algorithm
and hierarchical temporal memory,” Numenta, Redwood City, CA, USA,
White paper, 2011, pp. 1–68.
[34] I. Lampl and Y . Yarom, “Subthreshold oscillations of the membrane
potential: A functional synchronizing and timing device,” J. Neurophys-
iol., vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 2181–2186, Nov. 1993.
[35] S. D. Antic, W. Zhou, A. R. Moore, S. M. Short, and K. D. Ikonomu,
“The decade of the dendritic NMDA spike,” J. Neurosci. Res., vol. 88,
no. 14, pp. 2991–3001, Nov. 2010.
[36] G. Major, M. E. Larkum, and J. Schiller, “Active properties of neocor-
tical pyramidal neuron dendrites,” Annu. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 36, no. 1,
pp. 1–24, Jul. 2013.
[37] P. Poirazi and A. Papoutsi, “Illuminating dendritic function with com-
putational models,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 303–321,
Jun. 2020.
[38] N. Koshiya and J. C. Smith, “Neuronal pacemaker for breathing visu-
alized in vitro,” Nature, vol. 400, no. 6742, pp. 360–363, Jul. 1999.
[39] T. Hafting, M. Fyhn, S. Molden, M.-B. Moser, and E. I. Moser,
“Microstructure of a spatial map in the entorhinal cortex,” Nature,
vol. 436, no. 7052, pp. 801–806, Aug. 2005.
[40] E. T. Reifenstein, R. Kempter, S. Schreiber, M. B. Stemmler, and
A. V . M. Herz, “Grid cells in rat entorhinal cortex encode physical
space with independent firing fields and phase precession at the single-
trial level,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 109, no. 16, pp. 6301–6306,
Apr. 2012.
[41] N. T. Robinson et al., “Medial entorhinal cortex selectively supports
temporal coding by hippocampal neurons,” Neuron, vol. 94, no. 3,
pp. 677–688, 2017.
[42] T. David, A. S. Alexander, L. K. Quinn, A. A. Chiba, and N. Douglas,
“Multiplexed oscillations and phase rate coding in the basal forebrain,”
Sci. Adv., vol. 4, no. 8, 2018, Art. no. eaar3230.
[43] B. Pesaran, J. S. Pezaris, M. Sahani, P. P. Mitra, and R. A. Andersen,
“Temporal structure in neuronal activity during working memory in
macaque parietal cortex,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 5, no. 8, pp. 805–811,
Aug. 2002.
[44] J. Huxter, N. Burgess, and J. O’Keefe, “Independent rate and temporal
coding in hippocampal pyramidal cells,” Nature, vol. 425, no. 6960,
pp. 828–832, Oct. 2003.
[45] B. Olshausen and D. Field, “Sparse coding of sensory inputs,” Current
Opinion Neurobiol., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 481–487, Aug. 2004.
[46] H. P. Snippe, “Parameter extraction from population codes: A critical
assessment,” Neural Comput., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 511–529, Apr. 1996.
[47] M. de Kamps and F. van der Velde, “From artificial neural networks
to spiking neuron populations and back again,” Neural Netw., vol. 14,
nos. 6–7, pp. 941–953, Jul. 2001.
[48] D. O. Hebb, The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological
Theory. New York, NY , USA: Psychology Press, 2005.
[49] S. Song, K. D. Miller, and L. F. Abbott, “Competitive Hebbian learning
through spike-timing-dependent synaptic plasticity,” Nature Neurosci.,
vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 919–926, Sep. 2000.
[50] J.-W. Lin and D. S. Faber, “Modulation of synaptic delay during synaptic
plasticity,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 449–455, Sep. 2002.
[51] S. Boudkkazi, L. Fronzaroli-Molinieres, and D. Debanne, “Presynaptic
action potential waveform determines cortical synaptic latency,” J. Phys-
iol., vol. 589, no. 5, pp. 1117–1131, 2011.
[52] B. Xu, Y . Gong, and B. Wang, “Delay-induced firing behavior and
transitions in adaptive neuronal networks with two types of synapses,”
Sci. China Chem., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 222–229, Feb. 2013.
[53] M. Butz, F. Wörgötter, and A. van Ooyen, “Activity-dependent structural
plasticity,” Brain Res. Rev., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 287–305, 2009.
[54] A. Holtmaat and K. Svoboda, “Experience-dependent structural synaptic
plasticity in the mammalian brain,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 10, no. 9,
pp. 647–658, Sep. 2009.
[55] T. Xu et al., “Rapid formation and selective stabilization of synapses
for enduring motor memories,” Nature, vol. 462, no. 7275, pp. 915–919,
Dec. 2009.
[56] M. Fu and Y . Zuo, “Experience-dependent structural plasticity in the
cortex,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 177–187, Apr. 2011.
[57] B. Scholl, C. I. Thomas, M. A. Ryan, N. Kamasawa, and D. Fitzpatrick,
“Cortical response selectivity derives from strength in numbers of
synapses,” Nature, vol. 590, no. 7844, pp. 111–114, Feb. 2021.
[58] Y . Cui, S. Ahmad, and J. Hawkins, “Continuous online sequence learning
with an unsupervised neural network model,” Neural Comput., vol. 28,
no. 11, pp. 2474–2504, 2016.
[59] A. Waibel, T. Hanazawa, G. Hinton, K. Shikano, and K. J. Lang,
“Phoneme recognition using time-delay neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 328–339, Mar. 1989.
[60] A. Graves, “Supervised sequence labelling with recurrent neural net-
works,” in Studies in Computational Intelligence. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2012.
[61] N.-Y . Liang, G.-B. Huang, P. Saratchandran, and N. Sundararajan,
“A fast and accurate online sequential learning algorithm for feedforward
networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1411–1423,
Nov. 2006.
[62] F. Hill, A. Bordes, S. Chopra, and J. Weston, “The Goldilocks principle:
Reading children’s books with explicit memory representations,” in
Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), San Juan, Puerto Rico,
May 2016, pp. 1–13. [Online]. Available: http://OpenReview.net
[63] V . I. Levenshtein, “Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, inser-
tions, and reversals,” Sov. Phys. Doklady, vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 707–710,
1966.
[64] J. A. Starzyk and A. Horzyk, “Episodic memory in minicolumn associa-
tive knowledge graphs,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30,
no. 11, pp. 3505–3516, Nov. 2019.
[65] A. Horzyk, J. A. Starzyk, and J. Graham, “Integration of semantic and
episodic memories,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 28,
no. 12, pp. 3084–3095, Dec. 2017.
[66] NYC Taxi & Limousine Commission. New York City Taxi Rides.
Accessed: Feb. 15, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.nyc.gov/site/
tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page
[67] R. J. Hyndman and G. Athanasopoulos, Forecasting: Principles and
Practice, 2nd ed., Canberra, QLD, Australia: OTexts, 2018.
[68] H. Jaeger and H. Haas, “Harnessing nonlinearity: Predicting chaotic sys-
tems and saving energy in wireless communication,” Science, vol. 304,
no. 5667, pp. 78–80, Apr. 2004.
[69] G. Ma, R. Jiang, R. Yan, and H. Tang, “Temporal conditioning spiking
latent variable models of the neural response to natural visual scenes,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2023, pp. 3819–3840.
[70] R.-J. Zhu, M. Zhang, Q. Zhao, H. Deng, Y . Duan, and L.-J. Deng,
“TCJA-SNN: Temporal-channel joint attention for spiking neural net-
works,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 3,
pp. 5112–5125, Mar. 2025.
[71] H. Tang et al., “Neuromorphic auditory perception by neural spiketrum,”
IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 292–303,
Feb. 2025.
Malu Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from the University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China, in 2019.
From 2019 to 2022, he was a Research Fellow
with the HLT Laboratory, Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore. He is currently a Profes-
sor with the Computational Intelligence Laboratory,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Uni-
versity of Electronic Science and Technology of
China. His research interests include spiking neural networks, neural spike
encoding, and neuromorphic applications.
Dr. Zhang is currently an Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE .
Xiaoling Luo received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from the University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 2023.
She is currently a Lecturer with the School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Sichuan Univer-
sity of Science and Engineering, Yibin, China. Her
current research interests include machine learning
and spiking neural networks.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHANG et al.: TOW ARD BUILDING HUMAN-LIKE SEQUENTIAL MEMORY 10155
Jibin Wu (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the
National University of Singapore, Singapore, in
2016 and 2020, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Data Science and Artificial Intel-
ligence, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Hong Kong. He has published more than 40 papers
in prestigious conferences and journals in artifi-
cial intelligence and speech processing, including
NeurIPS, ICLR, AAAI, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE , IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS , IEEE/ACM T RANS -
ACTIONS ON AUDIO , S PEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING , and IEEE
JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING . His research
interests broadly include brain-inspired artificial intelligence, neuromorphic
computing, computational audition, speech processing, and machine learning.
Dr. Wu is currently serving as an Associate Editor for IEEE T RANS -
ACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS and IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS .
Ammar Belatreche (Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from Ulster Uni-
versity, Derry, U.K., in 2006.
He joined Northumbria University, Newcastle
upon Tyne, U.K., in May 2016. He worked as
a Research Associate with the Intelligent Systems
Research Centre (ISRC), Ulster University, and
then, as a Lecturer in computer science with the
School of Computing and Intelligent Systems, Ulster
University. He is currently a Senior Lecturer in
computer science and the Program Leader of the
M.Sc. advanced computer science with the Department of Computer and
Information Sciences. He is also a member of the Computational Intelligence
and Visual Computing (CIVC) Research Group. His research interests include
bioinspired intelligent systems, machine learning, face detection and recogni-
tion, structured and unstructured data analytics, capital markets engineering,
image processing, and understanding.
Dr. Belatreche is a fellow of the Higher Education Academy, an Associate
Editor of Neurocomputing, and has served as a Program Committee Member
and a reviewer for several international conferences and journals.
Siqi Cai (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the Shien-Ming Wu School of
Intelligent Engineering, South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2020.
She is currently a Research Fellow with the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore. Her
research interests include brain–computer interface
and biosignal processing.
Dr. Cai has been a Council Member of Chinese and
Oriental Languages Information Processing Society
since 2022. She has served as the Workshop Chair for the 47th IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP)
2022, and the Entrepreneurship Forum Chair for ICASSP 2024. She has served
as an Associate Editor for the International Journal of Social Robotics.
Yang Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
bachelor’s degree from Jilin University, Changchun,
China, in 2006, the master’s degree from Peking
University, Beijing, China, in 2009, and the
Ph.D. degree from The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, QLD, Australia, in 2012, under the super-
vision of Prof. H. T. Shen and Prof. X. Zhou.
From 2012 to 2014, he was a Research Fellow with
the National University of Singapore, Singapore,
under the supervision of Prof. T.-S. Chua. He is cur-
rently with the University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, Chengdu, China. He specializes in multimedia, machine
learning, AI, big data, computer vision, and social media. He has published
more than 100 articles in top-tier venues (including ACM multimedia, IJCAI,
SIGMOD, and CVPR).
Dr. Yang has also served as an Editor, a Program Committee Member, and
a reviewer for leading journals/conferences.
Haizhou Li (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Sc.,
M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and electronic
engineering from the South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 1984, 1987, and
1990, respectively.
He is currently a Presidential Chair Professor with
the School of Data Science, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China. He is also an
Adjunct Professor with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, National University of
Singapore (NUS), Singapore. His research interests
include automatic speech recognition, speaker and language recognition, and
natural language processing.
Dr. Li has been a member of the Editorial Board of Computer Speech
and Language since 2012 and an Elected Member of the IEEE Speech
and Language Processing Technical Committee from 2013 to 2015. He is
a fellow of ISCA and Academy of Engineering Singapore. He was
the Editor-in-Chief of IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON AUDIO , S PEECH
AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING from 2015 to 2018, the President of the
International Speech Communication Association from 2015 to 2017, the
President of Asia–Pacific Signal and Information Processing Association
from 2015 to 2016, and the President of Asian Federation of Natural Language
Processing from 2017 to 2018. He was the General Chair of ACL 2012,
INTERSPEECH 2014, ASRU 2019, and ICASSP 2022.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 13:56:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 